Why.
Hello everyone and welcome to a colour change over time.
A great example of that is this sunset we can see in front of us.
Not only is the sun changing colour but the whole scene changes as well.
This is relatively straightforward to do now.
We will also have a look an error message you can get.
I've upscaled this image chaser's easy to see if I go ahead and try and make my image size itself by
scaling an image.
1 0 2 4 by 1 or 2 4 and try and scale it.
We get an out of memory error and we'll discuss how to sort that out as well.
Okay so before we get into the nitty gritty of what's going on in this particular image just a quick
autopsy of the whole thing as it currently stands.
To kind of get an idea of what's going on.
Now obviously the animation start at the bottom so we can scroll all the way down.
If we start from frame 1 and isolate it we can see there's a sky there's a ground and there's a horizon
and the sun slowly lowers through the sky as the sun lowers through the sky you've all seen a sunset
before it changes colour as it goes down eventually causing a bit of a haze as it comes towards the
horizon and you can see the vullo groups themselves start to get more and more complex as we go up.
There's more detail going on.
We've got overlays making the whole thing dark.
Now we've got the sunsets.
And as the sunset comes out you know what I thought would be a great addition.
A couple of stars coming out until finally it just gets dark over those 20 frames and we can see all
the stars in the sky.
Now not only do we have 20 frames in this particular animation but there are multiple layers on here.
Not all of them have been optimized.
When I was working with the sun itself I had a problem because the layer size itself the lower boundary
was just around the sun itself.
And when you have something like that when it comes to blurring and we're have a look a blurring as
well it was just blurring inside that Square and obviously the sun is not a square.
It is a circle so a have a closer look.
That's the same sort of things applies to something like a candle for instance how colour change over
time or colour change over the surface depending on the temperature.
This is all part of making a convincing animation.
Okay so now we've had the autopsy of the image out of the way let's take it back a little and have a
closer look at building something like that up from scratch and a few other tools and tips as you go
along.
So first of all of course we need an image.
Let's go ahead and create a new image.
In this case I'm going to make it 64 by 64 to demonstrate what's going on.
Now I've got a brush here.
Let's go for the pencil tool and I'm going to make this about 20 in size.
Now for the pallets itself I'm going to pick four fire code pallete.
So I've got a nice selection of white all the way through to a black.
But going through the yellows oranges and reds as well as the name suggests this is good for anything
that burns.
So in this case I'm going to go pick an orange and dump an orange circle in the middle.
Now one of the tools I use a lot whether it's to make something slightly blurry or to smudge it into
a certain shape is the smudged tool that is the picture of a finger on the tool shelf we consider shortcut
keys s if we go ahead and use that what we can do is we can change the way our image looks and you can
see you can make a ball of fire very easily using this.
They did have the bear in mind in this particular layer.
I can move white in as well because White is the background there.
So you always have to start where there's a bit of colour and then move it about.
Now you can build up a flame as you can probably see very quickly with this technique.
Now you can lay down with the brush or pencil you know bang in the middle and start smudging again and
this is just one way of building up something like a flame or a fireball or anything else along those
lines it doesn't have to be fire.
It just happens to be the colours that I'm using at the moment that make the most sense.
And then finally I can make a circle in the middle a bit smaller and a bit of white white means it's
going to be really hot.
And then once again kind of smudge that in and there we go we've got a flame.
Now of course you can do a very similar thing if you've got a that let's see the paint brush tool instead
of smudging it in.
We can have a low pass city on our paint brush.
If we have it set too high and we go in let's say try and create a red border around this.
It's going to look quite horrible.
However what we can do is turn down the capacity and then it's going to take many many more strokes
in order to lay down that border.
And this is where we can get some fine control over our artwork.
So one of the things.
I was considering when I was making the sunset was how is the what's the quickest way that I can do
this sunsets with out spending too long doing it.
I don't know what it's going to look like.
I want to be experimental and quick about it.
And with most things it is a good idea to be as quick as you can about it to get a good idea of what
you need to do.
And that goes with art especially it's very easy to end up doing a lot of work for not a lot of gain
you know you start tweaking something making it look better in this way make it look better in that
way.
To be honest it doesn't really matter.
On the first pass as long as you get a good idea of the rough shape the form how it's going to look
how it's going to move in the turn.
In the animation terms then that's a good starting point.
If I go ahead now and create a new image we can start building up something like the sunset straight
away.
Now I had a horizon that I had made using the gradient fill.
I'd found one called land and I literally drew that on there.
That's my background at this point.
I wanted to separate the sky and the ground from one another.
So I got this retain give a select tool and cut that bottom bit out created a new layer.
In this case I'm going to call it ground and we can rename the other one the moment paste it in and
then anchor it in such as reinforcing what we've been over so far.
Then of course we've got the sky now the ground itself.
We need that to be on top of any sum that actually happens or as it comes down so there's the sun in
the sky Let's create that on a new layer and I'm going to call it Sun.
So we're just piecing together our particular layer here there's the sun and what we should be able
to do is making sure we move it we can see that it disappears as it goes below the horizon.
Now what I didn't know before I showed you the image we had earlier it was what I was going to do with
the sun with all the smudging that I was doing with it.
So I ended up going to layer and auto cropping the layer to small.
And obviously if you do that then smudge you end up with the smudgy square rather than being able to
smudge it out so I had to go through each of the ones that I was smudging about and go to layer and
layer to image size.
In this case just so I could smudge it out a little more and in fact you know I could put clouds floating
through the sky would be an example here using that Smudge tool I've created a fluffy white cloud.
And again you could go in and let's say with the brush tool just add a few dark spots on the underside
and you see how that starts giving it a bit of three dimensionality because we've included some value
in this cloud it's now got a shadow underneath it and that's the way that our brains do perceive things
shadow tends to be underneath and highlights and light tends to be on top.
If you don't conform to that it can be confusing for the viewer who is looking at your work.
Now once of course you've got your basic layers.
And so I've got a cloud there now so I'm going to create a new layer and called it Sun change the sun
layer back to cloud because all that is bad let's try that again cloud.
There we go.
And we've got a sun that's just name it properly.
Now we can go ahead and create a layer group and I'm going to call that as always frame hash.
Once I can build up hot necked the ground is going to be on top of everything because it's in the foreground
that's important it's at the front of the image as the sun comes down which there isn't one yet so I
put the sun for instance on going makes like the yellow to make it stand out and use the pencil tool
so that's really bold.
Now I want the cloud to be in naturally in front of the sun some sorting out the order here as well
as I build up my labour group.
So I'm just put everything in the lay group initially.
We go all sky has gone on top it's not it's the background the ground itself needs to be on top of everything
else because it goes below the horizon it's off there.
You can see here now got this cloud I can move the cloud about as part of the animation as well all
bringing it together rather well.
Finally as the sun was setting there were a couple of things that you could potentially do now.
One of them is to just have a film layer over the entire lots of we go ahead and create a new layer.
And in this case I'm going to call it the darkness because essentially that's what it is or you could
call it a gradient it's entirely up to you but this darkness goes over absolutely everything.
If I go and grab my fill buckets and just let's say khara in black obviously the whole thing go black.
But this time I can adjust the pastie of the layer and you can see that's what you could do jobs that
look a tiny bit odd with the sun still in the sky.
So forgive me for that but you can see you could have a frame like this and as the sun dips down you
can.
Make it progressively darker and darker and darker until it goes really dark.
And if you change the colour of this you can give everything perhaps a red tint to it or indeed and
you can see he you can drag and drop a colour over to a layer and it will fill in with that layer as
well.
So you could give the whole world an orange tint.
It's a very quick way of experimenting with slightly different colour schemes.
In fact in this case you could almost give something a sepia type effect just adding in a bit of a yellow
or orange tint to it and turning that up and suddenly you've got maybe a Western type scene.
Obviously wouldn't have the green grass at the front as well.
And then of course the next thing to do was to go through and duplicate the frame as we've done before
and then have a good think about how you want things being visible and how you don't want to be invisible.
In this case as I was doing the sun I would select.
But in this case down here I'd select the sun don't layer and auto crop the layer round so I've got
the border of that sun and then the next sun itself I know where to place it because of the previous
outline.
Of course you can do this in numerous ways.
One of the easiest ways again would would be to actually grab the frame itself the whole layer group
and reduce its opacity sir.
Let's lower it down to 50 percent and then you can see through to the previous one as well and they
will build upon one another.
So in this case I could have it 50 percent for everything at the frame.
The topless said 50 I'm pretty sure it did.
So we can see it under there.
And then I can go and grab my son and the move tool and making sure under the tool options were moving
the active layer only I can move it down there and then I can duplicate that frame again find my son
move it down here etc etc. As soon as that setting has given changed the colour of the sun as well.
And of course adjust the other parameters for everything else perhaps move the cloud across and then
when you go to your animation and play back you can see that we've got a very short three frame here
one where the sun is dropping and the cloud is just shuffling backwards and forwards not the greatest
of animations but it's the beginnings and the building blocks for something that will end up really
really good.
Now finally one of the issues you can have when you've got a load of layers.
First of all try and optimize them so once you had once you've done with everything go in and layer
auto crop the layer bring it back down to a sensible size that uses less memory then.
But one of the other things you can do is go to Edit preferences and this is where you can start playing
about with your options.
So maximum new image size.
Now we're starting to work with many many layers and on larger images as well.
You're going to start hitting some bottlenecks.
So in this case what I can do is go to my maximum new image size and to demonstrate this live I'm going
to go to a project that does require some go hope head and open up my sunset so I've made I'm going
to go to my layer and actually invoke that error message that came before me as a scare.
No I'm not Moscow.
And on a scale the entire image it's going to scale up to one to four.
And when we do that we get the error message.
So you're trying to create an image with a size of 490 megabytes.
Now this is actually quite large considering it's basically pixel art at this stage but it is because
of the multitude of layers that are being used at this point and scale in the image to the chosen size
or make use more memory than what is configured as the maximum image size in the preferences dialogue.
So if I go ahead and scale that it will actually work but it'll exceed that memory requirement.
And we can go ahead in edit once it's finished doing it.
Now some tasks in GIMP do last longer.
There we go it's finished doing that.
If we have gone in I'm going to undo that.
The Undo is going to go back to the base image and now this time go to preferences and change the new
image size.
Let's Trush try five 12 in this case.
Now I don't suggest that you go in change fees unless it's absolutely necessary at this point.
What you can accidentally end up doing is making guimpe unstable or unusable.
If you don't have much RAM on your computer.
So now that I've done that change in the preferences I can go to image scale image.
Now when I do the 1 0 2 for scaling it should work because 490 is less than 512.
And we can see it doesn't complain about it anymore.
And there we go we've got ourselves a nice sunset all scaled up ready to share with people.
And that leads us nicely now on to a challenge.
And your challenge is going to be to go and make your own sunset.
Now you're going to have a bit of free reign with the length of your animation.
Again I suggest you keep it under five seconds if nothing else for your own sanity and your resolution.
Go for around 128 by 128.
Now feel free to change the scene.
Put your own spin on it.
At this stage in the course you're more than capable of putting your own spin on it and making these
challenges more of your own.
Obviously following a long and completing the challenge see you've got the work done is important but
equally what's important is being able to take what you've learnt and reapply it and make sure you do
do your own mini projects in between these challenges.
An example of makee perhaps your own would be to maybe add some street lamps or indeed houses lights
coming on at dusk and just give you an idea of what I had gone for in my example.
We got stars coming out of the sun setting.
I've made that slight blur as it drops below the horizon and the whole tint changes to a deep red before
going and fading darker again.
So there we go there is your challenge.
Good luck.
I shall see you on the other side.
Looking forward to seeing your work and I will see you all in the next lecture.